The Tsukurimashou parametric font family and IDSgrep are in general covered
by the GNU GPL, version 3, with an exception to explicitly permit font
embedding.  However, some files in this package when considered individually
are covered by other copyrights, and licenses of their own.  See the
individual files for their specific licensing terms.

A copy of the GNU GPL, version 3, is included in the file COPYING.GPL3.

The following notice applies to the package as a whole, the generated fonts,
and the main source code and documentation:

     This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it
     under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
     Free Software Foundation, version 3.

     As a special exception, if you create a document which uses this font,
     and embed this font or unaltered portions of this font into the
     document, this font does not by itself cause the resulting document to
     be covered by the GNU General Public License.  This exception does not
     however invalidate any other reasons why the document might be covered
     by the GNU General Public License.  If you modify this font, you may
     extend this exception to your version of the font, but you are not
     obligated to do so.  If you do not wish to do so, delete this exception
     statement from your version.

     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
     WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
     General Public License for more details.

     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
     with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

The IDSgrep program (not included in standard distributions of
Tsukurimashou, but available from the same source-control repositories) is
covered by the above notice except without the font-embedding exception,
which would be irrelevant to IDSgrep.

The files mp/fntbase.mp and tools/mp2pf, which are modified versions of code
from the METATYPE1 package, are public domain with the following notices:

     THIS FILE IS PUBLIC DOMAIN NOTWITHSTANDING THE COPYRIGHT ON THE OVERALL
     TSUKURIMASHOU PACKAGE

     This file is based on the files "fontbase.mp" and "plain_ex.mp" from
     the METATYPE1 package version 0.55.  Those files contain no
     copyright-related notices of their own, but the README for METATYPE1
     version 0.55 contains the following notices (in English and Polish; the
     slashes are verbatim from the original and presumably are some
     convention for expressing non-ASCII Polish letters in the ASCII file):

         This is METATYPE1 package -- a tool for creating Type 1 fonts using
         METAPOST.  The package belongs to public domain (no copyrights,
         copylefts, copyups, copydowns, etc.).
         Version: 0.55 (16.09.2009; a tentative version, released along with
                  the sources of the Latin Modern fonts ver. 2.003)
         Author: JNS team <JNSteam@gust.org.pl>

         To jest pakiet METATYPE1 -- narz/edzie do tworzenia font/ow Type 1
         za pomoc/a systemu METAPOST.  Pakiet stanowi dobro wsp/olne
         (/zadnych copyright/ow, copyleft/ow, copyup/ow, copydown/ow, etc.).
         Wersja: 0.55 (16.09.2009 -- wersja opublikowana wraz z wersj/a
                 /xr/od/low/a 2.003 pakietu font/ow Latin Modern)
         Autorstwo: JNS team <JNSteam@gust.org.pl>

     Although I assert my general right to claim copyright on work of my own
     that draws from public domain source materials, I nonetheless am
     releasing this file to the public domain in an effort to maintain the
     spirit of the JNS team's release above.

     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
     WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

The configure and Makefile.in files and any others generated by Autotools
and incidentally included in the package as part of the build system will
generally include notices from the Free Software Foundation in addition to
the ones from their source code; the exact notices may vary depending on the
tool versions used to generate the files, but some typical ones are as
follows:

     Copyright (C) 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001,
     2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010 Free Software
     Foundation, Inc.

     This configure script is free software; the Free Software Foundation
     gives unlimited permission to copy, distribute and modify it.

     Copyright (C) 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002,
     2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011 Free Software
     Foundation, Inc.

     This Makefile.in is free software; the Free Software Foundation gives
     unlimited permission to copy and/or distribute it, with or without
     modifications, as long as this notice is preserved.

     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
     WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law; without even the
     implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
     PURPOSE.

The Autoconf macros in the m4/ directory of the distribution are covered by
a variety of licenses from a variety of copyright holders.  Most bear a
notice like this one:

     [copyright holder and date noted here]

     Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification,
     are permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright
     notice and this notice are preserved.  This file is offered as-is,
     without any warranty.

The files m4/tsu_colourise.m4 and m4/tsu_table_line.m4 are public domain
with this notice:

     This macro is released to the public domain by its author,
     Matthew Skala <mskala@ansuz.sooke.bc.ca>.

The file m4/ax_create_stdint_h.m4 contains this notice:

     Copyright (c) 2008 Guido U. Draheim <guidod@gmx.de>
  
     This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
     under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
     Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at your
     option) any later version.
  
     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
     WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
     General Public License for more details.
  
     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
     with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
  
     As a special exception, the respective Autoconf Macro's copyright owner
     gives unlimited permission to copy, distribute and modify the configure
     scripts that are the output of Autoconf when processing the Macro.  You
     need not follow the terms of the GNU General Public License when using
     or distributing such scripts, even though portions of the text of the
     Macro appear in them.  The GNU General Public License (GPL) does govern
     all other use of the material that constitutes the Autoconf Macro.
  
     This special exception to the GPL applies to versions of the Autoconf
     Macro released by the Autoconf Archive.  When you make and distribute a
     modified version of the Autoconf Macro, you may extend this special
     exception to the GPL to apply to your modified version as well.

The file txt/aglfn.txt, which lists recommended glyph names for Unicode
code points, contains this notice:

     Copyright (c) 2003,2005,2006,2007 Adobe Systems Incorporated
     
     Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
     copy of this documentation file to use, copy, publish, distribute,
     sublicense, and/or sell copies of the documentation, and to permit
     others to do the same, provided that:
     - No modification, editing or other alteration of this document is
     allowed; and
     - The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
     included in all copies of the documentation.
     
     Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
     copy of this documentation file, to create their own derivative works
     from the content of this document to use, copy, publish, distribute,
     sublicense, and/or sell the derivative works, and to permit others to
     do the same, provided that the derived work is not represented as being
     a copy or version of this document.
     
     Adobe shall not be liable to any party for any loss of revenue or
     profit or for indirect, incidental, special, consequential, or other
     similar damages, whether based on tort (including without limitation
     negligence or strict liability), contract or other legal or equitable
     grounds even if Adobe has been advised or had reason to know of the
     possibility of such damages.X The Adobe materials are provided on an
     "AS IS" basis.X Adobe specifically disclaims all express, statutory, or
     implied warranties relating to the Adobe materials, including but not
     limited to those concerning merchantability or fitness for a particular
     purpose or non-infringement of any third party rights regarding the
     Adobe materials.

The files t1asm/clp.c and t1asm/clp.h, which form a library used by t1asm,
contain this notice:

     Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
     copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
     "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, subject to
     the conditions listed in the Click LICENSE file, which is available in
     full at http://www.pdos.lcs.mit.edu/click/license.html.  The conditions
     include: you must preserve this copyright notice, and you cannot
     mention the copyright holders in advertising related to the Software
     without their permission.  The Software is provided WITHOUT ANY
     WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED.  This notice is a summary of the Click
     LICENSE file; the license in that file is legally binding.

However, the Click license is not, in fact, available at that URL.  It
apparently is now available at http://www.read.cs.ucla.edu/click/license . 
To reduce future confusion should it move again, and given that the Click
license says it "shall be included in all copies" of covered works, I
reproduce it here (as well as in the distributed versions of the source
files):

     The Click License

     Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person
     obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files
     (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction,
     including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge,
     publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software,
     and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so,
     subject to the following conditions:

     The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
     included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

     The name and trademarks of copyright holders may NOT be used in
     advertising or publicity pertaining to the Software without specific,
     written prior permission. Title to copyright in this Software and
     any associated documentation will at all times remain with copyright
     holders.

     THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
     EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
     MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. 
     IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
     CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
     TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
     SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

The t1asm program itself (t1asm/t1asm.c) contains the following notice:

     Copyright (c) 1992 by I. Lee Hetherington, all rights reserved.

     Permission is hereby granted to use, modify, and distribute this program
     for any purpose provided this copyright notice and the one below remain
     intact.

     I. Lee Hetherington (ilh@lcs.mit.edu)

     1.5 and later versions contain changes by, and are maintained by,
     Eddie Kohler <ekohler@gmail.com>.

